# Market integration in a transitional hunter-gatherer population only benefits males

Background and Objectives: The transition from hunting-gathering to domestication and market economics creates disparity in wealth and health. Comparing past and contemporary transitions is challenging due to differences in data. We ask whether methodological differences have failed to capture sex-based health differences in past transitional societies.
Methodology: We collected data in living hunter-gatherers for a common marker of poor health in past populations, missing enamel that indicates an interruption in growth during childhood due to malnutrition or disease. We analyzed data using t-tests with sex as a factor. We then analyzed data using additional information available in living populations, year of birth, via a time series regression. 
Results: Without year of birth included in analysis, no sex-based differences are found, which makes sense given that hunter-gatherers establish minimal social hierarchies beyond a sex-based division of labor. When including year of birth, we observe a clear difference between men and women. Starting about 40 years ago, younger generations of Hadza men experienced less childhood stress than women and older generations.
Conclusions and Implications: Economic and subsistence transitions often cause negative impacts to health. Sometimes transitions differentially benefit one sex (usually male) or disadvantage the other (usually female). The transition to a market economy in bush-living Hadza has benefitted men’s health, but not women’s. The broader implications are that the sex-based division of labor in hunting-gatherer societies is exacerbated by external forces favoring male activities over female. 
